# 七 评价：你的生活能得到一个好的信用分数么

> 当反乌托邦科幻小说变成现实，你的每一个小举动都被评价，谁赢谁输?

> On 14 June 2014, the State Council of China published an ominous-sounding document called ‘Planning Outline for the Construction of a Social Credit System’.[^1] In the way of Chinese policy documents, it was a lengthy and rather dry affair but it contained a radical idea. What if there was a national trust score that rated the kind of citizen you were? 

2014年6月14日，国务院发布了《社会信用体系建设规划纲要》[^1]。从中国的政策文件来看，这是一件冗长而枯燥的事情，但它包含了一个激进的观点。如果有一个国民信用的分数来评价你是什么样的公民呢?

> Imagine a world where many of your daily activities were constantly monitored and evaluated–what you buy at the store and online, where you are at any given time, who your friends are and how you interact with them, how many hours you spend watching content or playing video games, and what bills and taxes you pay (or not). It’s not hard to picture, because most of that already happens, thanks to all those data-collecting behemoths like Google, Facebook and Instagram, or health-tracking apps such as Fitbit that can capture your moves and location at any given time. But now imagine a system where all these behaviors are rated as either positive or negative and distilled into a single number, according to rules set by the government. That would create your Citizen Score and it would tell everyone whether or not you were trustworthy. Plus, your rating would be publicly ranked against that of the entire population and used to determine your eligibility for a mortgage or a job, where your children can go to school–or even just your chances of getting a date.

> A futuristic vision of Big Brother out of control? No, it’s already getting underway in China where the government is developing a system to rate the trustworthiness of its 1.3 billion citizens. I’m sure George Orwell has rolled over in his grave a couple of times in recent years, but this idea, called the ‘Social Credit System’ (SCS), must have him doing frantic 360-degree turns in his coffin.

> The Chinese government is pitching the system as a desirable way to measure and enhance ‘trust’ nationwide and to build a culture of ‘sincerity’. As the policy states, ‘It will forge a public opinion environment where keeping trust is glorious. It will strengthen sincerity in government affairs, commercial sincerity, social sincerity and the construction of judicial credibility.’2

> Others aren’t so sanguine about its wider purpose. ‘It is very ambitious in both depth and scope, including scrutinizing individual behaviour and what books people are reading. It’s Amazon’s consumer tracking with an Orwellian political twist,’ is how Johan Lagerkvist, a Chinese internet specialist at the Swedish Institute of International Affairs, describes the Social Credit System (SCS).3 Dr Rogier Creemers, a postdoctoral scholar specializing in Chinese law and governance at the Van Vollenhoven Institute at Leiden University, who published a comprehensive translation of the plan, compared it to ‘Yelp reviews with the nanny state watching over your shoulder’.4

> For now, technically, participating in China’s Citizen Scores is voluntary. But by 2020 it will be mandatory. The behaviour of every single citizen and legal person in China (which includes every company or other entity) will be rated and ranked, whether they like it or not. Teachers, scientists, doctors, charity workers, government administrators, members of the judicial system and even sports figures will be under special scrutiny.5 ‘Big data will become the most important and most powerful driver to accelerate the modernization of governmental governance capacity,’ states the plan.6

> Prior to the national rollout in 2020, the government is taking a watch-and-learn approach. In this marriage between Communist oversight and capitalist can-do, the government has given a licence to eight private companies to come up with systems and algorithms for social credit scores. Predictably, data giants currently run two of the best-known projects.

> The first is with China Rapid Finance, a partner of the social network behemoth Tencent and developer of the messaging app WeChat with more than 850 million active users. The other is run by the Ant Financial Services Group (AFSG), an affiliate company of Alibaba, and is called Sesame Credit. Ant Financial sells insurance products and provides loans to small- and medium-sized businesses. However, the real star of Ant is AliPay, its payments arm, which people use not only to buy things online but also for restaurants, taxis, school fees, cinema tickets and even to transfer money to each other.

> Sesame Credit has also teamed up with other data-generating platforms, such as Didi Chuxing, the ride-hailing company that was Uber’s main competitor in China before it acquired the American company’s Chinese operations in 2016, and Baihe, the country’s largest online matchmaking service. It’s not hard to see how that all adds up to gargantuan amounts of ‘big data’ that Sesame Credit can tap into to assess how people behave and rate them accordingly.

> So just how are people rated? Individuals on Sesame Credit are measured by a score ranging between 350 and 950 points.7 Alibaba does not divulge the ‘complex algorithm’ it uses to calculate the number but they do reveal the five factors taken into account. The first is credit history. For example, does the citizen pay their electricity or phone bill on time? Do they repay their credit card in full? Next is fulfilment capacity, which it defines in its guidelines as ‘a user’s ability to fulfil his or her contract obligations’. The third factor is personal characteristics, which is verifying personal information such as someone’s mobile phone number and address. But it’s the fourth category, behaviour and preferences, where it gets interesting and, some might say, more sinister.

> Under this system, something as innocuous as a person’s shopping habits become a measure of character. Alibaba admits it judges people by the types of product they buy. ‘Someone who plays video games for ten hours a day, for example, would be considered an idle person,’ says Li Yingyun, Sesame’s technology director.8 ‘Someone who frequently buys diapers would be considered as probably a parent, who on balance is more likely to have a sense of responsibility.’9 So if a citizen is buying socially approved items, like baby supplies or work shoes, their score rises. But if they’re buying Clash of Clans, Temple Run 2 or any video game, and thus looking like a lazy person, their score takes a negative hit. (I wonder how long it will take to get to the point where the system can judge their behaviour within a game? Maybe they will get a few points for being a ‘nicer’ player by, say, helping another player’s avatar in World of Warcraft.)





[^1]: ‘Planning Outline for the Construction of a Social Credit System’, China Copyright and Media, translated by Rogier Creemers, https://chinacopyrightandmedia.wordpress.com/2014/06/14/planning-outline-for-the-construction-of-a-social-credit-system-2014-2020/, accessed 3 March 2017.